Build New Economies
We need new companies, new infrastructure, new markets, and new economies. We need a surge of economic growth.

We need to build. We need to grow. We need to innovate. We need to do this on an epic scale. Not only new products. We need new companies, new infrastructure, new markets, and new economies. We need a surge of economic growth.

It is only through creation that we ensure economic growth.


Quarterly GDP growth, compared to the same quarter the previous year, 1991 - 2019. Data from the OECD.
Growth Breeds Growth

Let’s chart a very brief history of the internet’s first decade: Tim Berners-Lee created the World Wide Web in 1989. The general public had access in 1991. Marc Andreessen created the Mosaic web browser in 1993. Shortly after, the internet became a marketplace to buy and sell products and services. Amazon launched in 1994. Yahoo surfaced as an internal portal in 1994. In 1998, Google revolutionised online search, efficiently cataloguing the web for the first time. This broke Yahoo's business model. In the late 1990s, Chinese internet startups used the same business model but localised for Chinese consumers. Tencent, Alibaba, and Baidu remain.

In the space of a decade, the internet was created and grew into a multibillion pound economy. As the internet grew, the challenges faced spawned new technology and markets. Developers built the infrastructure to support this economy. To build the web, Tim Berners-Lee needed to create HTTP and HTML. In 1995, Brendan Eich created JavaScript. In 2004 Google developed MapReduce, followed by an open-source implementation, Hadoop. This helped manage the massive volume of data created by the internet. In 2005 Linus Torvalds developed Git. In 2008, GitHub launched, becoming the leading platform for software development.

Developers, engineers, and entrepreneurs built the internet. They built idea on idea, often to solve an existing problem. This is a specific example of the general form of progress. Entrepreneurs build economies through building ideas on ideas. An unappreciated aspect of this growth is the talent signal. As a new economy develops, it has problems. The world's smartest people navigate to the new economy. They build new ideas, products, and companies to solve those problems.

What did the internet economy lead to?1 It led to browser wars and browser companies. It led to ecommerce and online retail companies. It led to cloud computing. It led to social media. It led to the App Store marketplace. It led to online streaming. We no longer have internet companies. The internet companies became technology companies.

In 1991 it was impossible to predict the specific path the internet would take from the 1990s. Yet, we knew that one economic invention would lead to others. Every economic invention is the bottom of a triangle, which is built upon.


The triangle of innovation.
Growth breeds growth. One new economy spawns others. The profit signalling mechanism brings more talent and capital. We see spillover effects. This is the case at the global level.


Correlation between countries. In this sample, most countries display a moderate correlation with other countries. Data from the OECD.
Replace Incumbents, Build Enduring Companies

Entrepreneurs and innovators have excellent ideas. To transform these into economic value we need companies. To create persistent economies we need enduring companies. Enduring companies build excellent products. They deliver profit and free cash flow as demand remains strong. 

The challenge to enduring companies is that innovation trumps incumbency. 

The jet engine beat the propeller. The computer replaced the typewriter. The iPhone killed the Blackberry. The shipping container revolutionised sea freight. 

Amazon beat Borders. Google killed The Yellow Pages. iTunes killed the CD. Spotify rendered iTunes pointless.

A company built for the new economy will beat incumbent companies who try to transition. 

A core reason for the economic growth achieved in developed economies is the process of new replacing old.



Quarterly GDP growth, compared to the same period the previous year.  Analysis displays evidence of statistically significant autocorrelation. The growth in quarter y in year n is associated with the growth in quarter y in year n+1, up to k lags. Autocorrelation plots for Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, Germany, India, Japan, South Korea, the UK, and the USA are available in the Git repo. Data from the OECD.
Schumpeter termed this creative destruction. He said it was “the essential fact about capitalism.” Steve Jobs knew that if you didn’t cannibalise yourself, someone else would. To build the new, we have to destroy the old.

Enduring companies can ride out periods of disruption. Apple and Microsoft are two great examples of enduring companies. They have ridden out innovation by leading innovation.2 Though it is a losing battle. Every company has a finite lifespan. It’s the management’s job to extend this as long as possible.

The Time To Build Is Now

It’s never been easier to innovate, build a startup, and plant the seeds of the future.3 The advantage of now is that we are standing on the shoulders of giants. There are so many industries available to us to build upon. 

Technology has reduced the barriers to entry in many industries, especially in software. Open-source software and frameworks enable quick building. For non-technical entrepreneurs platforms like Wix, Shopify and YouTube allow them to create websites, build ecommerce sites and produce videos.

There are untapped markets. There are industries ripe for disruption. New industries are waiting to be built. We live in a global world and a global market. Seven billion people are the biggest market there has ever been. Historically you had to find product-market fit and sell your product to the people in your village. You can now sell online to five billion people.  

It’s never been easier to access capital to fund innovation and new ventures. Venture capital funding has been growing and is close to all time highs.

Industries of the Future

What are the industries of the future? Predicting the future is hard.4 It’s better to make the future. In 1998, who thought that applying a Markov Chain to indexing the internet would create the next internet behemoth? In 2004, who thought that the next successful business model would be a free platform to connect with friends? In the 1970s who thought that we would move backwards and not have supersonic commercial air travel in 2022?

The transformative industry of the future is one where entrepreneurs apply maths and science to something. Cars, planes, cloud computing, and video communication. The combination of engineers, scientists, and developers in business is potent. Having a technological, scientific, or business model (financial) superiority delivers a competitive advantage. Achieve all three and you’ll build a behemoth. Commercial space travel and logistics, artificial intelligence, and autonomous vehicles are three.

Build New Economies

The time to build is now. We have the opportunity to create new economies that will dwarf anything we’ve seen before. The space industry (tourism, satellites, freight) will likely be much greater than the internet economy.

As we innovate, from the smallest of ideas (the barcode), we plant the seeds for the next industry. Growing industries and creating new industries drive economic growth. Economic growth is progress.

1
The impact of the internet is non-linear. Most people do not have the imagination to appreciate the non-linear impact of new inventions.

2
Apple and Microsoft spend significant money on research and development. Microsoft Research is one of the world’s pre-eminent industrial research labs.

3
Warren Buffett once said: “Someone's sitting in the shade today because someone planted a tree a long time ago.”

4
Take it from someone who has spent many years as a data scientist building predictive models.

The Git repo contains the data and analysis for this article.